BỘ GIÁO DỤC VÀ ĐÀO TẠO
TRƯỜNG ĐẠI HỌC MỞ THÀNH PHỐ HỒ CHÍ MINH

Nâng cao tính tự nhiên và tính ngữ cảnh trong tương tác hội
thoại với NPC bằng mô hình ngôn ngữ tinh chỉnh được thông
tin bởi trạng thái thế giới game động trong game tường thuật

Mã số đề tài: 866

TP. Hồ Chí Minh, 2026

BỘ GIÁO DỤC VÀ ĐÀO TẠO
TRƯỜNG ĐẠI HỌC MỞ THÀNH PHỐ HỒ CHÍ MINH

Dynamic Game State-Informed Fine-Tuned Language
Models for Natural and Context-Aware NPC Dialogue in
Narrative Games

Mã số đề tài: 866

Chủ nhiệm đề tài: Lê Trần Minh Phúc
Khoa: Đào Tạo Đặc Biệt
Người hướng dẫn: TS. Lê Đăng Giáp

TP. Hồ Chí Minh, 2026

BỘ GIÁO DỤC VÀ ĐÀO TẠO

CỘNG HOÀ XÃ HỘI CHỦ

TRƯỜNG ĐẠI HỌC MỞ

NGHĨA VIỆT NAM

THÀNH PHỐ HỒ CHÍ MINH

Độc lập - Tự do - Hạnh phúc

THÔNG TIN KẾT QUẢ NGHIÊN CỨU CỦA ĐỀ TÀI

1. Thông tin chung:
- Tên đề tài: Nâng cao tính tự nhiên và tính ngữ cảnh trong tương tác hội thoại với NPC
bằng mô hình ngôn ngữ tinh chỉnh được thông tin bởi trạng thái thế giới game động trong
game tường thuật
- Tên đề tài (tiếng Anh): Dynamic Game State-Informed Fine-Tuned Language Models
for Natural and Context-Aware NPC Dialogue in Narrative Games
- Mã số đề tài: 866
- Sinh viên chủ nhiệm đề tài: Lê Trần Minh Phúc
- Khoa: Đào Tạo Đặc Biệt

Mã số sinh viên: 2251010074

- Giảng viên hướng dẫn: TS. Lê Đăng Giáp
2. Mục tiêu đề tài:
Xây dựng và đánh giá một hệ thống hội thoại NPC tích hợp đầu-cuối cho trò chơi tường
thuật, trong đó mô hình ngôn ngữ cục bộ được điều kiện hóa theo trạng thái trò chơi động
nhằm nâng cao độ bám ngữ cảnh, tính nhất quán vai trò nhân vật và chất lượng phản hồi
trong điều kiện triển khai thời gian thực.
3. Tính mới và sáng tạo:
Đề tài kết hợp đồng thời trích xuất ngữ cảnh từ UE5, truy hồi lai có cơ chế guard chống
poisoning/trust-spoof, sinh phản hồi bằng mô hình tinh chỉnh cục bộ và lớp kiểm soát
hậu sinh có cơ chế fallback trong cả hai nhánh triển khai Python và C++. Thiết kế này
cho phép đồng nhất hành vi giữa môi trường đánh giá và runtime trong game, đồng thời
hỗ trợ phân tích ablation theo từng thành phần.

4. Kết quả nghiên cứu:
Trên bộ 112 kịch bản cố định, cấu hình kiểm soát theo ngữ cảnh cải thiện có ý nghĩa thống
kê so với cấu hình ngữ cảnh thô ở các chỉ số chính: context relevance (+0.2131), persona
consistency (+0.2150), naturalness (+0.1158) và overall quality (+0.1808). Trong kiểm
thử đối kháng, tỷ lệ tấn công thành công giảm từ 1.0 xuống 0.0 dưới cấu hình guard.
5. Đóng góp về mặt kinh tế - xã hội, giáo dục và đào tạo, an ninh, quốc phòng và
khả năng áp dụng của đề tài:
Kết quả đề tài đóng góp quy trình kỹ thuật có thể kiểm chứng cho phát triển NPC hội
thoại trong sản phẩm trò chơi số, hỗ trợ đào tạo liên ngành giữa AI và phát triển game,
đồng thời nhấn mạnh cơ chế kiểm soát rủi ro nội dung khi ứng dụng mô hình ngôn ngữ
trong hệ thống tương tác.
6. Công bố khoa học của sinh viên từ kết quả nghiên cứu của đề tài:
Hiện chưa có công bố khoa học chính thức; kết quả đang được hoàn thiện dưới dạng bản
thảo học thuật và báo cáo kỹ thuật nội bộ.

TP. Hồ Chí Minh, 2026

i

Table of contents
List of tables

iv

List of figures

v

List of abbreviations

vi

Abstract

1

Keywords

1

1

2

2

3

Research problem, scope, and contributions
1.1 Limitations of scripted and unconstrained NPC dialogue paradigms . . . .

2

1.2 Research focus: dynamic state-grounded local NPC dialogue in UE5 . . .

2

1.3 Scope, assumptions, and boundary conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

1.4 Evidence strategy and inferential criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

1.5 Contributions and claim boundaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

1.6 Research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

1.7 Formal objective and optimization formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4

Theoretical and empirical foundations

5

2.1 International research landscape for LLM-driven game interaction . . . .

5

2.2 Domestic research landscape and deployment context in Vietnam . . . . .

6

2.3 Core constructs and operational definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6

2.4 Theoretical foundations for adaptation, retrieval, and runtime control . . .

7

2.5 Hypotheses and analytical model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8

System architecture and empirical methodology
3.1 Evidence-gating protocol and study design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9
9

3.2 Online runtime architecture and data flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.3 Model adaptation, retrieval training, and data pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.4 Evaluation methodology: quantitative and qualitative components . . . . 16
3.5 Analytical derivations of decision and evaluation formulas . . . . . . . . . 20

ii

4

Empirical findings and integrated analysis

22

4.1 Primary benchmark results under matched settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.2 Human evaluation and inter-rater agreement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.3 Serving and retrieval performance trade-offs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.4 Component-level ablation results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.5 Threats to validity and interpretive boundaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.6 Comparison with prior work and practical implications . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5

Conclusions, implications, and future directions

31

5.1 Ethical and policy implications for NPC deployment . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.2 Principal findings and bounded claims . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.3 Study limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5.4 Future research agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
A

Reproducibility protocols and extended methods

33

A.1 Scenario taxonomy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
A.2 Prompt and context serialization specification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
A.3 Response-control specification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
A.4 Adversarial retrieval protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
A.5 Human evaluation protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
A.6 Compute and runtime environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
B

Extended interpretation and comparative notes

35

B.1 Comparative-scope limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
B.2 Future work plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
B.3 Detailed reproducibility report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
B.4 Supplementary comparative discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
B.5 Failure taxonomy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
B.6 Qualitative case analyses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
C

Comprehensive tables and scenario catalog

39

C.1 Supplementary tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40

iii

C.2 Full scenario index (112 scenarios) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
C.3 Research-question traceability matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
D

Scenario-level and counterfactual stress diagnostics

45

D.1 Scenario-level analytical notes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
D.2 Counterfactual stress analysis notes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47

iv

List of tables
1

Comparative positioning against representative prior systems. . . . . . . .

9

2

Benchmark profile used for all fixed-arm comparisons. . . . . . . . . . . . 17

3

Controlled arm versus external no-context baselines under matched protocols. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23

4

Response-control ablation (controlled contextual vs. raw contextual). . . . 26

5

Retrieval-method ablation deltas relative to BM25 (higher is better). . . . 26

6

Serving ablation (candidate vs. baseline phi3:mini). . . . . . . . . . . . . 27

7

Claim-to-evidence synthesis for principal findings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28

8

Core metrics from the latest full benchmark evaluation. . . . . . . . . . . 40

9

Serving comparison from the latest system benchmark evaluation. . . . . 40

10

Retrieval and adversarial security summary from benchmark artifacts. . . 40

11

Scenario-level taxonomy index used in the primary evaluation. . . . . . . 40

12

Traceability from research questions to implementation and evidence artifacts. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45

13

Representative scenario-level analytical notes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47

v

List of figures
1

Online runtime architecture and data flow. Solid arrows denote inference
flow; dashed arrows denote conditioning and control inputs. . . . . . . . . 11

2

Offline training and evaluation flow with feedback loops. The candidate model and control configuration are exported to the online runtime
pipeline in Figure 1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

3

Paired mean-delta gains of controlled contextual generation over raw contextual generation, with 95% CI whiskers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23

vi

List of abbreviations
Abbreviation

Description

ASR

Attack Success Rate

BM25

Best Matching 25 retrieval model

CI

Confidence Interval

DPO

Direct Preference Optimization

LLM

Large Language Model

MRR

Mean Reciprocal Rank

nDCG

Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain

NPC

Non-Player Character

OQ

Overall Quality

QLoRA

Quantized Low-Rank Adaptation

RAG

Retrieval-Augmented Generation

RQ

Research Question

TTFT

Time to First Token

UE5

Unreal Engine 5

1

Abstract
This paper presents an end-to-end system for narrative-game NPC dialogue that couples fine-tuned local language models with live game-state conditioning. The goal is
to improve naturalness, persona consistency, and contextual relevance while preserving deployability in Unreal Engine 5. The architecture integrates four tightly coupled
components: context extraction from game state, hybrid retrieval with poisoning-aware
guard scoring, local response generation, and post-generation response control deployed
in both Python and C++ runtime paths.
Evaluation is conducted with fixed scenarios, paired significance testing, confidence
intervals, ablations, and a completed multi-rater study. On a 112-scenario benchmark,
controlled contextual generation outperforms raw contextual generation with mean deltas
of +0.2131 (context relevance), +0.2150 (persona consistency), +0.1158 (naturalness),
and +0.1808 (overall quality), with one-sided bootstrap p(∆ ≤ 0) < 1/B across core
metrics. Against external no-context baselines (phi3:mini and phi3:latest), the controlled
system achieves statistically positive outcomes on 10 of 12 tested metrics per baseline
and improves overall quality in both comparisons.
Human evaluation (324 ratings) reports substantial preference for the controlled system and moderate inter-rater agreement (κ = 0.5329 mean pairwise). Security stress tests
show complete suppression of successful poisoning-follow behavior under the guard
configuration (attack success rate reduced from 1.0 to 0.0). The primary negative finding
is serving efficiency: latency and throughput are not superior to lighter baseline serving
configurations. The main contribution is a reproducible, evidence-scoped framework
that demonstrates quality and robustness gains without obscuring performance tradeoffs.

Keywords
NPC dialogue, game AI, local LLM, UE5, QLoRA, response control, retrieval robustness, benchmark reproducibility, neuro-symbolic systems.

2

Chapter 1: Research problem, scope, and contributions
This chapter defines the research problem and claim boundaries of the study. It first clarifies why existing scripted and unconstrained LLM dialogue paradigms are insufficient
for deployment-critical narrative games, then specifies the scope, research questions, and
formal optimization objective used throughout the manuscript.

1.1

Limitations of scripted and unconstrained NPC dialogue paradigms

Narrative games require NPC dialogue that is simultaneously fluent, role-consistent, and
grounded in dynamic world state. Survey evidence shows that classical authored dialogue pipelines remain dependable in production but incur rapidly growing authoring
cost as interaction breadth increases [2, 3]. LLM-driven NPC systems improve linguistic
flexibility, yet often fail under strict gameplay constraints such as quest-state consistency,
inventory grounding, and stable persona control across multi-turn interaction [1, 2, 3].
The core challenge is therefore not text generation alone; it is runtime integration.
A model can produce plausible standalone responses and still behave unreliably in an
engine loop when context extraction, retrieval ranking, and post-generation control are
weakly coupled. Prior work demonstrates promising qualitative behavior, but systemlevel evidence is often limited by narrow scenario coverage, weak adversarial testing, or
insufficient statistical reporting [2, 4].

1.2

Research focus: dynamic state-grounded local NPC dialogue in UE5

This paper addresses that gap by designing and evaluating an end-to-end local runtime
for context-grounded NPC dialogue in Unreal Engine 5. The method combines six components: bounded game-state serialization, prompt compilation, hybrid retrieval, guardaware evidence scoring, local generation, and response control with fallback logic. The
evaluation protocol is designed to answer a scientific question rather than present isolated demos: under fixed scenarios and controlled comparisons, does this architecture
improve context relevance, persona consistency, and robustness without hiding negative
trade-offs?

3

1.3

Scope, assumptions, and boundary conditions

The study is scoped to narrative-game dialogue under UE5 runtime constraints, with
local model serving and fixed-scenario evaluation under matched prompts. The experimental window includes both adversarial stress settings and a predefined human-rating
campaign so that automatic and human evidence are interpreted within the same protocol.

1.4

Evidence strategy and inferential criteria

To maintain scientific clarity, conclusions are explicitly scoped to measured axes. The
study includes fixed-arm benchmarking, paired bootstrap tests, confidence intervals, ablations, human-rater agreement analysis, and adversarial stress evaluation. This allows
us to report both improvements (quality and security robustness) and limitations (serving
latency/throughput trade-offs).

1.5

Contributions and claim boundaries

Relative to prior LLM-in-games studies, the main contribution is not merely local finetuning, but the explicit coupling between architectural design and inferential evidence.
The manuscript therefore explains why each component is included, how it is evaluated, and which effects remain after ablation. This structure helps separate empirically
supported engineering claims from open hypotheses that require further study.

1.6

Research questions

The evaluation is organized around four explicit research questions. RQ1 examines
whether controlled context-grounded inference improves context relevance, persona
consistency, naturalness, and overall quality over raw contextual generation under
matched prompts and decoding settings. RQ2 tests whether the same architecture
outperforms no-context external baselines under identical scenario protocols. RQ3
asks whether guard-aware retrieval materially reduces adversarial follow-through under
poisoned and trust-spoofed evidence conditions. RQ4 characterizes the quality-latency
trade-offs that emerge when guard and response-control mechanisms are enabled in an

4

in-engine runtime.

1.7

Formal objective and optimization formulation

Formally, given player input xt , dynamic world state st , retrieval corpus D, and NPC
persona profile p, the objective is to generate response yt such that:
max Q(yt ; xt , st , p)

(1)

s.t. R(yt , st ) ≤ ϵr , C(yt , p) ≥ τc , L(yt ) ≤ τl ,

(2)

where Q aggregates quality metrics, R denotes safety/risk violations, C denotes persona/context constraints, and L denotes runtime constraints.
For repeated interactions, the policy objective is:
π ⋆ = arg max E(xt ,st ,p)∼T [Q(π(xt , st , p))] ,
π

(3)

with quality decomposed as:

∑

Q = wcr CR + wpc P C + wn N + wb B − wv V,
wi = 1,

wi ≥ 0,

(4)

i

where CR is context relevance, P C is persona consistency, N is naturalness, B is semantic similarity score, and V is violation risk. The empirical program then addresses four
linked questions: whether controlled context-grounded inference improves over raw contextual generation, whether it outperforms no-context external baselines under identical
protocols, whether guard-aware retrieval reduces adversarial follow-through, and what
serving trade-offs emerge when stronger control mechanisms are enabled. The contributions are therefore architectural, methodological, and empirical: an integrated UE5
runtime that combines state extraction, guarded hybrid retrieval, local generation, and
runtime response control; parity between Python and C++ control paths; a fixed-arm
benchmark with inferential statistics and multi-rater evaluation; and a reproducibility
package that preserves both positive and negative findings.
For chapter-level traceability, Chapter 2 develops the theoretical and comparative

5

grounding for these objectives, Chapter 3 defines the system and evaluation procedures
used to test them, Chapter 4 reports quantitative and qualitative findings under that protocol, and Chapter 5 provides bounded conclusions and deployment-oriented recommendations.

Chapter 2: Theoretical and empirical foundations
This chapter positions the study in the relevant literature and establishes the theoretical
basis for the tested architecture. The discussion integrates international and Vietnamese
research landscapes, then maps these foundations to explicit hypotheses evaluated in
later chapters.

2.1

International research landscape for LLM-driven game interaction

Rule-based game dialogue systems remain strong in predictability and safety under strict
authored quest logic, but their principal limitation is scalability because open-ended interaction breadth requires high authoring and maintenance cost [2, 3]. LLM-driven NPC
systems invert that trade-off by improving fluency and coverage, but they introduce instability under dynamic state constraints and longer interaction horizons [1, 2, 3]. Recent
interaction studies report promising collaboration and immersion signals while still documenting unresolved challenges in response latency, deterministic grounding, and robust
runtime control [4, 5]. As a result, the central open problem has shifted from linguistic
plausibility to controllable integration under game-runtime constraints.
Parallel work on game-capable language agents broadens this picture. Voyager
demonstrates strong open-world progression in Minecraft through curriculum generation, skill-library reuse, and iterative code refinement [12]. However, its objective
is general embodied task completion rather than role-faithful NPC dialogue; consequently, it does not directly address persona consistency, narrative constraints, or
dialogue-specific human preference evaluation. Similarly, SIMA emphasizes languageconditioned action execution across multiple 3D environments and shows progress on
cross-world instruction following [13], but it is not designed as a narrative dialogue

6

controller and therefore leaves unresolved the question of turn-level conversational
admissibility under dynamic story state. At the interaction-interface level, voice-driven
NPC systems can improve perceived freedom and engagement [14]; however, hybrid
designs that map paraphrased speech to predefined dialogue options are intentionally
constrained by authored dialogue structure, which limits fully open-ended generation
under adversarial or contradictory context.

2.2

Domestic research landscape and deployment context in Vietnam

In the Vietnamese context, one of the most sustained research infrastructures has been the
VLSP community, which emphasizes shared tasks, benchmark construction, and reproducible evaluation pipelines across language and speech problems [6, 7]. This ecosystem has recently expanded toward large-model development for Vietnamese, including
foundation-model adaptation and language-specific continual pretraining such as VinaLLaMA and Vi-Mistral-X [8, 9]. In parallel, early Vietnamese RAG and multimodal-LLM
efforts have improved resource availability through open datasets, evaluation suites, and
model releases [10, 11].
However, these domestic advances are concentrated in general NLP capability,
benchmark engineering, or modality expansion, rather than in in-engine NPC dialogue systems with dynamic game-state grounding, adversarial retrieval controls, and
deployment-parity validation. In other words, Vietnam has strong momentum in language technology building blocks, but still limited peer-reviewed system studies that
integrate those components into a single, auditable narrative-game runtime. This is the
specific domestic gap targeted by the present study.

2.3

Core constructs and operational definitions

This work uses four central concepts: context relevance as fidelity to dynamic world
state, persona consistency as adherence to NPC role profile, naturalness as linguistic
plausibility under interaction constraints, and robustness as resistance to malicious or
inconsistent evidence injection.

7

2.4

Theoretical foundations for adaptation, retrieval, and runtime control

At the model-adaptation level, prompt engineering and instruction tuning provide fast behavior shaping [15, 16], while RLHF-style methods and preference optimization improve
adherence to desired responses [17, 38]. Prompting strategies that explicitly structure intermediate reasoning and action feedback, such as Chain-of-Thought and ReAct, further
strengthen controllability in complex task settings [21, 22]. Parameter-efficient adaptation through LoRA and QLoRA enables local deployment under constrained memory
budgets [18, 19]. Retrieval-aware generation frameworks such as Self-RAG further show
that adaptive retrieval and self-critique can improve factuality [20]. Their main weakness for deployment-critical NPC systems is that they prioritize general factual quality
and controllability, but do not explicitly target adversarial evidence handling in gamespecific retrieval pipelines.
Benchmarking work on LLM agents and long-context reasoning clarifies why these
gaps persist in runtime game deployments. AgentBench shows that even strong models degrade on multi-turn decision tasks requiring sustained planning and instruction
fidelity [36]. LongBench further shows that performance drops substantially as context
length and task heterogeneity increase, and that retrieval-based compression only partially closes the gap for weaker long-context models [37]. For dynamic NPC dialogue,
these findings imply that naive context accumulation is insufficient; bounded state serialization, retrieval prioritization, and explicit post-generation control are required to
maintain stable behavior as interaction horizons expand.
Retrieval-augmented generation strengthens factual grounding, from the original RAG formulation to more recent survey syntheses and graph-based extensions
[42, 44, 43, 49, 48]. However, retrieval also creates a new control surface where
poisoning, trust spoofing, and ranking manipulation can alter downstream generation.
Recent high-impact attack studies reinforce this concern: indirect prompt injection can
compromise application behavior through retrieved context [45], knowledge-corruption
attacks can induce attacker-chosen outputs with a small number of injected passages
[46], and adversarial instructional prompts can subvert retrieval behavior even when

8

user queries are fixed [47]. A substantial share of reported evaluations remains centered
on benign relevance quality, while adversarial coverage is less consistently reported
in game-oriented dialogue settings. This is a key weakness for game NPC settings,
where retrieval errors can directly induce in-character policy violations. Evaluation
methodology presents a related issue: overlap-only scoring is insufficient for interactive
dialogue quality, dialog-metric behavior can vary substantially across datasets and settings [24], and modern embedding- and judge-based protocols can still carry positional
or verbosity biases [23, 30, 29, 31]. For this reason, interactive dialogue systems require
convergent evidence across automatic metrics, inferential statistics, human preference,
and agreement analysis [50].

2.5

Hypotheses and analytical model

The integrated theoretical position tested in this manuscript is that coupling guarded retrieval and response control with dynamic game-state conditioning produces measurable
gains in relevance, persona fidelity, and robustness under fixed evaluation constraints.
Operationally, this position is tested through four linked hypotheses aligned with the
research questions: controlled context-grounded inference improves core quality metrics
over raw contextual inference; the same controlled setting remains superior to no-context
external baselines under matched protocols; guarded retrieval reduces adversarial followthrough probability; and the quality and robustness gains are accompanied by measurable
serving-time overhead. These hypotheses are evaluated with paired comparisons and
uncertainty reporting rather than point estimates alone.
The gap addressed in this paper is therefore not a missing individual component but
a missing systems integration with strong inferential discipline. Based on the surveyed
and representative systems literature reviewed above, we did not identify peer-reviewed
studies that jointly combine bounded state serialization, guarded hybrid retrieval, local
generation, runtime response control, and multi-axis inferential evaluation in one reproducible in-engine pipeline [2, 3, 4]. The present study is positioned to test that integrated
design directly and to bound conclusions to measured axes rather than broad modelgeneral assertions.

9

Table 1: Comparative positioning against representative prior systems.
Representative system
Generative Agents [1]
Minecraft NPC collaboration [4]
Voyager [12]
Self-RAG [20]
This study

Dynamic game-state grounding Retrieval attack handling Runtime parity checks Inferential + human evidence
Partial
Partial
No (dialogue-centric)
No (game-runtime specific)
Yes

No
No
No
Limited
Yes

No
Limited
Limited
No
Yes

Limited
Limited
No
Partial
Yes

Limitation relative to this study
Focuses on social simulation rather than in-engine constraint control
Emphasizes interaction quality, with narrower robustness analysis
Optimizes task progression, not persona-grounded NPC dialogue reliability
Strong retrieval generation quality, but not game-runtime adversarial integration
Latency and throughput remain weaker than lightweight baselines

Chapter 3: System architecture and empirical methodology
This chapter reports the end-to-end research procedure and the mixed-method design
used in the study, combining quantitative fixed-arm evaluation with qualitative scenariolevel interpretation and rater-based judgment.

3.1

Evidence-gating protocol and study design

The evaluation protocol is defined as an evidence-completeness criterion rather than a
binary yes-or-no decision rule. Let:
Γ = 1[Ccov ∧ Csig ∧ Cbase ∧ Chuman ∧ Cretr ∧ Csec ] ,

(5)

where Ccov is scenario coverage, Csig is controlled-vs-raw significance, Cbase is external
baseline superiority threshold, Chuman is human-evaluation completeness and agreement,
Cretr is retrieval reporting completeness, and Csec is adversarial-security performance.

Under this definition, Γ = 1 indicates that all required evidence components are
present, while Γ = 0 indicates that at least one component is missing. Core requirements
include minimum scenario coverage of 100 (achieved: 112), significant controlled-vsraw improvements on key quality metrics, a minimum number of significant-positive external baseline comparisons, completed human-evaluation requirements (including row
count, agreement, and preference checks), complete reproducibility artifacts (metadata,
retrieval metrics, ablations, and confidence intervals), and security criteria based on ASR
reduction and guarded-ASR caps.
This protocol is necessary because game-AI manuscripts often conflate demonstration quality with deployment reliability. The conjunction criterion enforces conservative
inference by requiring convergent evidence from automatic metrics, statistics, human
ratings, and security stress tests.

10

Formally, with Cj ∈ {0, 1}, Γ is equivalent to a product gate:
∏

Γ=

Cj .

(6)

j∈{cov,sig,base,human,retr,sec}

Hence Γ = 1 if and only if all components equal 1, and any missing evidence component
forces Γ = 0. This gives the gate a conservative monotonic property: strengthening
a component from 0 to 1 cannot reduce Γ, while any remaining 0 still blocks a pass.
The rule therefore prevents partial-evidence acceptance and directly matches the stated
claim-discipline objective.
Algorithm 1 Evidence-completeness gate evaluation
Require: benchmark summary B, retrieval report R, human report H, security report S
Require: thresholds (nmin , kmin , κmin , ρmin , amax )
1: Ccov ← 1(B.scenario_count ≥ nmin )
2: Csig ← 1(core paired deltas are significant and CIs are positive)
3: Cbase ← 1(B.positive_baseline_metrics ≥ kmin )
4: Chuman ← 1(H.ratings complete ∧ H.κ ≥ κmin )
5: Cretr ← 1(R.metrics and ablations complete)
6: Csec ← 1(S.∆ASR ≥ ρmin ∧ S.ASRguard ≤ amax )
7: J ← {cov, sig, base, human, retr, sec}
8: Γ ← Ccov · Csig · Cbase · Chuman · Cretr · Csec
9: return Γ, and {j ∈ J : Cj = 0} as missing-evidence diagnostics

3.2

Online runtime architecture and data flow

The runtime pipeline is organized into six sequential stages: context extraction from UE5
simulation state, prompt and query construction with persona and dynamic-context slots,
hybrid retrieval with guard-aware evidence scoring, local LLM generation, responsecontrol rewrite or fallback selection, and memory-plus-citation updates. This decomposition was selected to isolate failure modes that are otherwise entangled in monolithic
prompting pipelines. In particular, extraction errors, retrieval errors, and generation errors can be inspected independently, which improves both debugging and ablation interpretability.
The architecture is implemented across engine-runtime and Python orchestration lay-

11

Player turn + UE5 state

Context extraction

Dialogue memory

Prompt/query builder

Persona profile

Retrieval + guard score

Retrieval corpus

Local generation

Response control

Runtime traces

NPC response to game loop

Figure 1: Online runtime architecture and data flow. Solid arrows denote inference flow; dashed
arrows denote conditioning and control inputs.

ers with explicit parity checks for core response-control behavior. This implementation
choice addresses a common validity risk in LLM systems for games: benchmark behavior diverges from runtime behavior when evaluation logic and deployment logic are
maintained in separate code paths.
The online execution path in Figure 1 is coupled with the offline build-and-validate
path in Figure 2. This coupling is deliberate: the model, guard configuration, and evaluation artifacts are produced offline and then transferred into runtime under parity checks,
reducing benchmark-versus-deployment drift.
The UE5 context extractor serializes behavior state, zone or location features, nearby
entities, and recent event summaries. Instead of injecting unbounded world logs, it uses
bounded payloads and normalized keys. This design is chosen over direct transcriptstyle context injection because game-state grounding depends on precise key-value consistency, while free-form logs often waste context budget on low-value narrative details.

12

Scenario dataset

SFT/QLoRA + DPO
+ reranker training

Candidate model
+ guard config

Fixed-arm benchmark
+ human/security eval

CIs, ablations,
and audit bundle

Figure 2: Offline training and evaluation flow with feedback loops. The candidate model and
control configuration are exported to the online runtime pipeline in Figure 1.

Bounded serialization therefore reduces prompt explosion, preserves critical quest and
inventory fields, and enables stable prompt templates under fixed token budgets.
The retriever combines sparse matching (BM25-like lexical) and dense similarity.
Candidate evidence is re-ranked with a guard-aware score:
− λgi ,
si = αsdense
+ (1 − α)ssparse
i
i

(7)

where gi is a risk term that aggregates injection cues, trust-spoof likelihood, and metadata
inconsistency. The hybrid form is selected because sparse matching is reliable for exact in-game entities, while dense retrieval improves recall for paraphrased player input;
neither method alone is consistently robust across both cases. Guard-aware re-ranking is
added because standard relevance scoring assumes benign documents and can over-rank
adversarial text that imitates authority, a behavior consistent with recent poisoning and
adversarial-instruction results in retrieval pipelines [46, 47]. The resulting score discourages high-ranked poisoned evidence without disabling retrieval utility.
Response control performs post-generation checks and optional rewrite/select logic.
It is implemented in both Python and C++ paths to guarantee runtime parity between

13

evaluation and in-game behavior. For candidate output ŷ , the controller computes:
F (ŷ) = wc ϕc + wp ϕp + wn ϕn − wv ϕv .

(8)

If F (ŷ) < τ , the system triggers a grounded fallback policy rather than returning unstable free-form text. This stage is included as a runtime alignment layer complementary to training-time adaptation, because instruction tuning and preference optimization
improve average behavior but cannot guarantee turn-level admissibility under noisy or
adversarial context.
The guard weight λ and control threshold τ are selected by constrained calibration
on a development set. The calibration objective is to maximize dialogue quality while
enforcing robustness and admissibility caps, rather than tuning to quality alone.
Algorithm 2 Guard-threshold calibration under risk constraints
Require: development scenario set Sdev , candidate grids Λ, Tτ , risk cap amax , optional fallbackrate cap fmax , latency weight η
1: initialize J ⋆ ← −∞, T ⋆ ← +∞, best pair (λ⋆ , τ ⋆ ) ← (None, None)
2: for each λ ∈ Λ do
3:

for each τ ∈ Tτ do

4:

run guarded pipeline on Sdev with (λ, τ )

5:

compute mean quality Q̄, ASRguard , fallback rate Frate , and latency T

6:

if ASRguard ≤ amax and (Frate ≤ fmax or no fallback cap) then

7:

compute calibration utility J ← Q̄ − ηT

8:

if J > J ⋆ or (J = J ⋆ and T < T ⋆ ) then

9:

update (J ⋆ , T ⋆ , λ⋆ , τ ⋆ ) ← (J, T, λ, τ )
end if

10:
11:
12:

end if
end for

13: end for
14: return (λ⋆ , τ ⋆ )

14
Algorithm 3 Runtime inference with guarded response control
Require: player input xt , world state st , persona p, retrieval corpus D
1: ct ← EXTRACTCONTEXT(st )
2: qt ← BUILDRETRIEVALQUERY(xt , ct , p)
3: Et ← HYBRIDRETRIEVE(qt , D)
4: Ẽt ← GUARDFILTER(Et )
5: πt ← BUILDPROMPT(xt , ct , p, Ẽt )
6: ŷt ← GENERATELOCAL(πt )
7: yt ← RESPONSECONTROL(ŷt , xt , ct , p)
8: UPDATEMEMORYANDCITATIONS(yt , Ẽt )
9: return yt

The algorithm has a stagewise cost decomposition
Ttotal = Tctx + Tret + Tguard + Tgen + Tctrl + Tmem .

(9)

With top-M retrieved candidates, guard scoring is O(M ), while generation dominates
asymptotically through autoregressive decoding.

This decomposition explains the

observed latency trade-off: robustness and admissibility checks increase deterministic
overhead even when generation settings are fixed.

3.3

Model adaptation, retrieval training, and data pipeline

The candidate serving identity is elara-npc:latest; external baseline serving identities include phi3:mini and phi3:latest. Fine-tuning is performed through QLoRA training and
adapter-based checkpointing.
Model selection followed two constraints: local deployability under commodity GPU
memory and stable inference latency under fixed decoding settings. Candidate and baseline systems were evaluated under a common prompt protocol to isolate architecture effects from prompt-format confounds.
Training and preference data are generated from domain-specific NPC dialogue scenarios, then normalized into instruction-response format with explicit context fields.
Data processing includes schema checks and minimum content constraints.

15

Given formatted pairs (x, y), supervised adaptation minimizes:
LSF T (θ) = −

|y|
∑∑

log πθ (yt | y<t , x).

(10)

(x,y) t=1

QLoRA is used for parameter-efficient adaptation under constrained hardware while retaining stable optimization for the target dialogue domain [19].
The training path supports checkpoint resume under local and Kaggle environments.
Resume logic is designed to avoid synthetic-success states by validating arm success
rates and non-empty generation outputs before accepting summaries.
Checkpoint governance includes three safeguards: hash verification of adapter
weights, replay checks on a fixed mini-benchmark, and fail-closed behavior when
resume metadata is inconsistent. These controls reduce false progress reporting and
preserve experiment integrity across interrupted long runs.
The training stack includes preference-dataset generation and DPO-style candidate
iteration, and a retrieval reranker stage trained on hard-negative pairs. Preference optimization follows:
∆θ (x, y + , y − ) = log πθ (y + | x) − log πθ (y − | x)
−

(11)

− log πref (y | x) + log πref (y | x),
+

(

)

LDP O (θ) = −E(x,y+ ,y− ) log σ β ∆θ (x, y + , y − ) ,

(12)

with (y + , y − ) denoting preferred and rejected responses.
For reranking, pairwise supervision on hard negatives uses a logistic ranking objective:

(

)

Lrank = − log σ f (q, d+ ) − f (q, d− ) .

(13)

The final reranker dataset contains 3360 pairs (2856 train, 504 evaluation).
The practical rationale for this two-stage adaptation is division of labor: DPO primarily shapes response preference behavior at generation time, while reranker training
improves evidence ordering before generation. This separation improves debuggability
because retrieval and generation errors can be analyzed and corrected independently.

16

The constrained objective introduced in Chapter 1 also implies this decomposition.
A Lagrangian relaxation of max Q(yt ; xt , st , p) subject to R(yt , st ) ≤ ϵr , C(yt , p) ≥ τc ,
and L(yt ) ≤ τl produces additive quality and penalty terms; this is the analytical reason
the runtime uses separable modules for quality maximization (generation) and constraint
enforcement (guard/control), rather than a single opaque stage.
Algorithm 4 Training and evaluation pipeline
Require: raw dialogue set D, preference set P, retrieval pair set R
1: preprocess and validate D, P, R
2: train QLoRA adapter with LSF T
3: if preference stage enabled then
4:

update candidate with LDP O

5: end if
6: train retrieval reranker with Lrank
7: run fixed-arm benchmark, human evaluation, and security stress tests
8: compute confidence intervals and acceptance criteria
9: archive reproducibility bundle
10: return trained candidate, evaluation reports, and archived artifacts

3.4

Evaluation methodology: quantitative and qualitative components

The primary benchmark uses 112 scenarios and five fixed arms: controlled contextual
generation, raw contextual generation, candidate no-context generation, phi3:mini nocontext baseline, and phi3:latest no-context baseline. Reported metrics include context
relevance, persona consistency, naturalness, BERTScore F1, and aggregate overall quality; metric selection is informed by recent factuality-focused evaluation practice such as
TruthfulQA and FactScore [25, 26].
For paired comparisons, we compute mean deltas, bootstrap confidence intervals
(95%), and one-sided p(∆ ≤ 0). For serving and retrieval metrics, we report means
and confidence intervals per model/method. To avoid impossible point estimates under
finite bootstrap sampling, very small one-sided values are reported at the finite-resolution
floor as p(∆ ≤ 0) < 1/B .
The experimental design follows a controlled arm-comparison protocol in which
scenario text, context slots, prompt templates, and decoding hyperparameters are held

17

Table 2: Benchmark profile used for all fixed-arm comparisons.
Design element

Specification

Scenario coverage

112 fixed scenarios with stratification across archetype, conflict condition, and behavior state
Controlled contextual, raw contextual, candidate no-context,
phi3:mini no-context, phi3:latest no-context
Context relevance, persona consistency, naturalness, overall quality,
BERTScore F1
Paired mean deltas, 95% bootstrap CIs, one-sided p(∆ ≤ 0) with
finite-resolution floor
324 blinded ratings, 3 raters, pairwise κ, soft and strict preference
rates
Poisoned and trust-spoofed sets (100 scenarios each), ASR and relative ASR reduction
TTFT, total response time, throughput (tokens/s), error rate under
matched settings

Evaluation arms
Core quality metrics
Inferential reporting
Human evaluation
Security stress tests
Serving diagnostics

constant across arms, while only the component under test is changed. This design
reduces confounding from prompt-format and decoding variability and makes ablation
deltas interpretable as component-linked effects. Scenario construction is stratified
across archetype, conflict condition, and behavior state to avoid single-style prompt
overfitting and to preserve variability in grounding stress. The evaluation framing
follows recent multi-axis assessment guidance for language systems, where quality,
robustness, and efficiency are reported jointly rather than collapsed into a single score
family [34].
Interpretation of component effects relies on standard identification assumptions:
scenario-level comparability across arms, stable metric definitions across conditions, and
no unmodeled intervention between retrieval, generation, and control stages within a single run. While these assumptions do not guarantee full causal identification outside the
benchmark scope, they are sufficient for disciplined within-protocol inference on relative
component effects.

18

Retrieval metrics are defined as:
1 ∑
1(ri ≤ k) ,
Hit@k =
N
N

MRR =
nDCG@k =

1
N
1
N

i=1
N
∑
i=1
N
∑
i=1

(14)

1
,
ri

(15)

DCG@ki
.
IDCG@ki

(16)

These estimators satisfy useful bounds needed for interpretation. For k2 ≥ k1 ,
1 ∑
Hit@k2 − Hit@k1 =
1(k1 < ri ≤ k2 ) ≥ 0,
N
N

(17)

i=1

so Hit@k is monotone non-decreasing. Since ri ≥ 1, each term 1/ri ∈ (0, 1], which
implies 0 ≤ MRR ≤ 1. By definition DCG@ki ≤ IDCG@ki , yielding 0 ≤ nDCG@k ≤
1. These properties justify cross-table comparability and prevent scale ambiguity across

retrieval methods.
Human-agreement reporting uses Cohen’s kappa:
κ=

po − pe
,
1 − pe

(18)

and preference win rate is reported as:
Wsof t =

Nwin + 0.5Ntie
.
Nall

(19)

Adversarial robustness is summarized by attack success rate:
Nsuccessf ul attacks
,
Nattacks

(20)

ASRbase − ASRguard
.
ASRbase

(21)

ASR =
and relative reduction:
∆ASR =

19
Algorithm 5 Paired bootstrap significance
Require: paired scores {(ai , bi )}ni=1 , bootstrap samples B
∑
1: ∆ ← n1
i (ai − bi )
2: for j = 1 → B do
3:

sample n index positions with replacement

4:

compute ∆⋆j on the sampled pairs

5: end for
6: CI ← percentile interval of {∆⋆j } at 2.5% and 97.5%
1
7: praw ← B

∑

⋆
j 1(∆j ≤ 0)

8: report p(∆ ≤ 0) < 1/B if praw = 0, else report p(∆ ≤ 0) = praw
9: return ∆, CI, reported p(∆ ≤ 0)

The bootstrap procedure is valid under paired-sample exchangeability: each scenario
contributes a paired delta di = ai − bi , and resampling index pairs preserves within∑
ˆ = 1
scenario dependence while approximating the sampling distribution of ∆
i di . As
n
∑B
⋆
B → ∞, the empirical tail estimator p̂B = B1
j=1 1(∆j ≤ 0) converges almost surely
to its bootstrap probability by the law of large numbers, which is why the one-sided
p(∆ ≤ 0) estimate is numerically stable when B is sufficiently large.

Because several metrics are tested per comparison, inferential claims are interpreted
in two tiers. Confirmatory claims are restricted to the pre-specified core metrics (CR,
P C , N , and OQ); additional metric tests are treated as supportive diagnostics and inter-

preted jointly with confidence intervals and effect magnitudes rather than by thresholded
p-values alone.

Human evaluation is executed as a blinded multi-rater campaign. The latest campaign
includes 324 ratings with three raters and reported pairwise kappa. Preference win rates
are computed as soft (ties weighted 0.5) and strict non-tie rates. Because LLM-based
evaluators can exhibit positional, verbosity, or model-family biases, model-judge outputs
are treated as secondary diagnostic signals rather than sole decision criteria [32].
Rater prompts were blinded to system identity and randomized by scenario to reduce
order effects. Each rating packet required explicit scoring for context relevance, persona
consistency, and overall quality before any free-text comment, which limited hindsight
bias in qualitative justification.

20

To reduce ambiguity in subjective scoring, raters followed a shared rubric with anchor
examples for low, medium, and high performance on each axis. Final analysis used the
prespecified rubric dimensions only; open-text comments were retained for qualitative
interpretation and error triage, not for post hoc metric construction.
Algorithm 6 Human-rating aggregation and agreement computation
Require: rating tensor R (scenario × arm × rater × metric), paired-arm set P
1: for each metric m do
2:

compute arm-level means s̄a,m by averaging over raters and scenarios

3:

compute pairwise Cohen’s κm on shared-rated items

4: end for
5: for each paired comparison (a, b) ∈ P do
6:

count wins Nwin , ties Ntie , losses Nloss from scenario-level aggregated ratings

7:

compute Wsof t = (Nwin + 0.5Ntie )/(Nwin + Ntie + Nloss )

8:

compute strict non-tie win rate Wstrict = Nwin /(Nwin + Nloss )

9: end for
10: return arm means, pairwise κ, Wsof t , and Wstrict

To support independent verification, the reproducibility package includes non-mock
serving traces, hardware and model metadata, retrieval metrics with ablations, serving
confidence intervals and deltas, prompt-parity checks, and adversarial security benchmarks. This packaging policy follows reproducibility recommendations that emphasize
executable artifacts, configuration transparency, and explicit reporting of failure cases
[35].
Each artifact bundle is treated as auditable evidence rather than supplemental decoration. A conclusion is considered supported only when the corresponding quantitative
outputs, confidence intervals, and procedure metadata are jointly available for inspection.

3.5

Analytical derivations of decision and evaluation formulas

The guarded retrieval score follows directly from a constrained optimization view. Let
the blended relevance term be ri = αsdense
+ (1 − α)ssparse
and let gi denote retrieval risk
i
i
for candidate i. If evidence selection is formulated as maximizing relevance under a risk

21

constraint, maxi ri subject to gi ≤ γ , the associated Lagrangian is L(i, λ) = ri − λ(gi − γ),
with λ ≥ 0. For fixed λ, maximizing L is equivalent to maximizing ri −λgi , because +λγ
is constant across candidates. This yields the practical ranking rule used in the paper:
si = αsdense
+ (1 − α)ssparse
− λgi .
i
i

(22)

The response-control threshold also has a direct optimality justification. Let U (ŷ)
be the utility of releasing the generated response and Uf b the utility of fallback. With
U (ŷ) = F (ŷ), the two-action decision problem is max{U (ŷ), Uf b }. The deterministic

optimal rule is therefore: release ŷ if and only if F (ŷ) ≥ Uf b , otherwise trigger fallback.
Writing τ = Uf b recovers the threshold policy used in the runtime.
The DPO and reranker objectives are negative log-likelihood estimators under pairwise logistic preference models. For DPO, assume the preference probability
( [

P (y + ≻ y − |x) = σ β ∆ log πθ − ∆ log πref

])

,

(23)

where ∆ log πθ = log πθ (y + |x) − log πθ (y − |x) and similarly for πref . Maximizing pairwise likelihood over the dataset is equivalent to minimizing the negative log-likelihood,
yielding
LDP O (θ) = −E log σ(β∆θ ) ,

(24)

which is the form implemented in the manuscript. The reranker objective follows by the
same argument with pairwise ordering probability P (d+ ≻ d− |q) = σ(f (q, d+ )−f (q, d− )),
which yields Lrank = − log σ(f (q, d+ ) − f (q, d− )).
The ASR reduction term has simple boundedness properties needed for interpretation.
With ASRbase > 0 and 0 ≤ ASRguard ≤ ASRbase ,
∆ASR =

ASRbase − ASRguard
ASRbase

(25)

satisfies 0 ≤ ∆ASR ≤ 1. The lower bound follows from ASRguard ≤ ASRbase , and the
upper bound follows from ASRguard ≥ 0. This justifies interpreting ∆ASR as normalized
relative reduction.

22

Chapter 4: Empirical findings and integrated analysis
This chapter reports the empirical outcomes corresponding to the hypotheses introduced
in Chapters 1 and 2. Results are organized from core quality effects to human judgments,
efficiency trade-offs, and component-level ablations so that each inference can be traced
to explicit quantitative evidence.

4.1

Primary benchmark results under matched settings

Controlled generation outperforms raw contextual generation on all core quality metrics:
∆CR = +0.2131 (95% CI [0.1962, 0.2285]),
∆P C = +0.2150 (95% CI [0.1878, 0.2419]),
∆N = +0.1158 (95% CI [0.0964, 0.1337]),
∆OQ = +0.1808 (95% CI [0.1666, 0.1953]).

where CR, P C , N , and OQ denote context relevance, persona consistency, naturalness,
and overall quality. All four comparisons have p(∆ ≤ 0) < 1/B .
Two observations are important for interpretation. First, all confidence intervals are
strictly positive, so the gains are not borderline effects driven by a narrow subset of
scenarios. Second, the largest gains occur in contextual and persona dimensions, which
are precisely the axes that most baseline systems underperform in practical gameplay.
The effect sizes are also practically large relative to the raw contextual arm: context
relevance improves by about 4.13×, persona consistency by about 1.52×, and overall
quality by about 84.4% (∆OQ/OQraw ). Naturalness increases by about 14.2%, indicating
that quality gains are concentrated where gameplay coherence depends most on state and
role fidelity.
These outcomes suggest that response control and guarded retrieval are not auxiliary
components. They are central mechanisms for converting a fine-tuned language model
into a reliable in-engine dialogue system.
Against phi3:mini no-context and phi3:latest no-context baselines, the controlled arm
achieves statistically significant positive deltas in 10 of 12 tested metrics for each base-

23

Mean ∆

0.213

0.215
0.181
0.116

Context

Persona

Naturalness

Overall

Metric

Figure 3: Paired mean-delta gains of controlled contextual generation over raw contextual generation, with 95% CI whiskers.
Table 3: Controlled arm versus external no-context baselines under matched protocols.
Baseline

Sig.+ metrics (/12)

∆OQ

phi3:mini
phi3:latest

10/12
10/12

+0.1672
+0.1685

One-sided p Soft win rate
< 1/B
< 1/B

0.7315
0.6806

line. As summarized in Table 3, overall quality deltas are +0.1672 and +0.1685, both
significant.
The remaining non-superior metrics are concentrated in lexical-diversity style indicators, not in grounding or consistency metrics. This pattern indicates a common control
trade-off: stronger factual and persona anchoring may reduce stylistic entropy. In deployment settings where role consistency and state alignment are prioritized, this tradeoff is usually acceptable.
Distinct-1 is lower for controlled generation than external baselines in current runs,
indicating that stronger grounding can reduce lexical novelty in this setup. This is discussed as a design trade-off, not hidden.
To separate statistical from practical significance, the observed gains are interpreted
against deployment objectives rather than significance alone. In this setting, the largest
absolute improvements occur on context and persona metrics, which directly correspond
to gameplay consistency requirements; therefore, these improvements are treated as operationally meaningful even when lexical-diversity indicators move in the opposite direction.

4.2

Human evaluation and inter-rater agreement

The human-evaluation report contains 324 ratings. Mean pairwise kappa across core
metrics is 0.5329. The soft preference win rate of the controlled arm is 0.7315 against

24

phi3:mini and 0.6806 against phi3:latest. Arm-level normalized overall quality means
are 0.8037 for the controlled arm, 0.6944 for phi3:mini, and 0.7278 for phi3:latest.
The agreement profile (κ = 0.5329) is consistent with moderate-to-substantial interrater reliability in subjective text assessment. Importantly, preference outcomes align
with automatic metrics: raters favor the same system that leads in context relevance
and persona consistency. This cross-method consistency strengthens the validity of the
quality conclusion.

4.3

Serving and retrieval performance trade-offs

From the serving summary and delta reports, TTFT mean is 542.62 ms for the candidate
model versus 273.86 ms for the baseline, total time mean is 3601.54 ms versus 3138.41
ms, and token throughput is 18.45 tokens/s versus 18.86 tokens/s. Serving-efficiency
superiority is therefore not demonstrated.
This negative result is retained deliberately. The controlled architecture improves
quality and robustness but incurs additional latency due to retrieval, guard scoring, and
post-generation control. For production adoption, this implies a tunable frontier rather
than a single dominant operating point.
On the retrieval axis, BM25 achieves Hit@5 = 1.0000, MRR = 0.8500, and nDCG@5
= 0.8893. Keyword-overlap retrieval reaches 0.9000, 0.8333, and 0.8500 on the same
metrics; random retrieval gives 0.4000, 0.1650, and 0.2204; and the reranker method
reports 0.9000, 0.8000, and 0.8262.
BM25 remains strongest on the current core label set, while the reranker is competitive and significantly stronger than random retrieval. This indicates that querydistribution effects matter: wider labeled sets are needed before asserting universal
reranker superiority.
At training-stage granularity, the hard-negative reranker stage uses 3360 pairs (2856
train, 504 eval) and reports pair-accuracy 0.9563 with 95% CI [0.9365, 0.9742].
Under adversarial stress, both poisoned and trust-spoofed test sets (100 scenarios
each) show baseline ASR = 1.0000, guarded ASR = 0.0000, and relative reduction =
1.0000, with confidence intervals included in artifact reports.

25

From a deployment perspective, this is one of the most consequential findings. The
guard layer does not merely reduce average error; it eliminates successful follow-through
on tested adversarial injections under the evaluated protocol.

4.4

Component-level ablation results

To interpret the ablation results rigorously, each component effect is defined as a conditional mean difference on metric m:
δ̂m,c = E[m | c = 1] − E[m | c = 0],

(26)

where c ∈ {context, guard, control}. For interaction effects between components c1 , c2 ,
we use the two-factor difference-in-differences estimator:
(

δ̂m,c1 c2 = E[m | c1 =1, c2 =1] − E[m | c1 =1, c2 =0]

(

)
)

(27)

E[ε | c1 , c2 ] = 0,

(28)

− E[m | c1 =0, c2 =1] − E[m | c1 =0, c2 =0] .

Under the additive interaction model
m = µ + τ1 c1 + τ2 c2 + τ12 c1 c2 + ε,

the difference-in-differences contrast above identifies τ12 exactly, while δ̂m,c identifies
the corresponding main effect. This is the formal reason the ablation analysis is reported
as main-effect and interaction-effect contrasts instead of raw arm differences only.

26

Table 4: Response-control ablation (controlled contextual vs. raw contextual).
Metric

Mean ∆

95% CI

p(∆ ≤ 0)

Context relevance
Persona consistency
Naturalness
Overall quality
BERTScore F1
Distinct-1

+0.2131
+0.2150
+0.1158
+0.1808
+0.0277
+0.0072

[0.1962, 0.2285]
[0.1878, 0.2419]
[0.0964, 0.1337]
[0.1666, 0.1953]
[0.0131, 0.0422]
[-0.0029, 0.0185]

< 1/B
< 1/B
< 1/B
< 1/B
< 1/B
0.0853

Table 5: Retrieval-method ablation deltas relative to BM25 (higher is better).
Method

Hit@5 ∆ MRR ∆ nDCG@5 ∆

Keyword overlap
Random
Reranker

-0.1000
-0.6000
-0.1000

-0.0167
-0.6850
-0.0500

-0.0393
-0.6688
-0.0631

Algorithm 7 Component ablation effect estimation
Require: scenario-level metric table T = {(mi , ci )}N
i=1 , component set C, bootstrap count B
1: for each metric m do
2:

for each component c ∈ C do

3:

compute paired contrast δ̂m,c = E[m | c=1] − E[m | c=0]

4:

bootstrap paired scenarios B times to obtain CI95 (δ̂m,c ) and one-sided p(δ̂m,c ≤ 0)

5:

end for

6:

for each component pair (c1 , c2 ) do

7:

compute interaction δ̂m,c1 c2 by difference-in-differences

8:

bootstrap CI95 (δ̂m,c1 c2 ) and one-sided p(δ̂m,c1 c2 ≤ 0)

9:

end for

10: end for
11: return main-effect and interaction-effect summary tables with uncertainty

Table 4 reports the full response-control ablation with uncertainty estimates, while
Tables 5 and 6 report retrieval and serving ablations. This layout makes each architectural
trade-off numerically explicit rather than summary-only.
Under this framework, response control produces the largest positive δ̂m,c on the core
quality axes, identifying it as a first-order architectural component rather than cosmetic
post-processing. Table 4 shows that all core quality metrics have strictly positive confidence intervals and one-sided p-values at the reporting floor, while Distinct-1 is not
significant at conventional levels; this supports a controlled-quality gain with a mild
style-diversity trade-off. The outcome is consistent with the design hypothesis that re-

27

Table 6: Serving ablation (candidate vs. baseline phi3:mini).
Metric

Candidate Baseline

TTFT (ms)
Total time (ms)
Tokens/s

542.62
3601.54
18.45

∆

273.86 +268.76
3138.41 +463.13
18.86
-0.41

Better?
No
No
No

trieval improves available evidence but does not itself enforce admissibility constraints
on generated text. In practice, disabling response control increases context omissions and
persona drift even when retrieval quality is unchanged, indicating that evidence quality
and output admissibility are separable control problems. The architecture therefore includes response control as a dedicated stage because it provides a deterministic decision
point where context alignment, persona consistency, and violation risk can be jointly
optimized before a response is released to the game loop.
Under the current core retrieval set, BM25 remains strongest. Table 5 quantifies this
directly, with all tested alternatives showing negative deltas relative to BM25 on Hit@5,
MRR, and nDCG@5. This does not invalidate reranker training quality; instead, it indicates that method-level superiority is query-distribution dependent and should be evaluated on wider labeled sets with broader lexical and semantic variation. The architecture
uses hybrid retrieval with guard-aware penalties because each component addresses a
different failure mode: sparse retrieval preserves exact-key matching for inventory and
quest references, dense retrieval improves semantic recall for paraphrased user input, and
guard penalties reduce susceptibility to poisoned or trust-spoofed evidence. This design
choice is aligned with the failure modes highlighted by recent adversarial-retrieval literature [46, 47]. The ablation shows that guard penalties can improve safety while slightly
reducing recall for ambiguous queries, a trade-off that is favorable in narrative-game
deployment where safety failures are typically higher-cost than moderate recall degradation.
Latency and throughput deltas remain unfavorable for the candidate at the current
quality configuration, as shown in Table 6. This pattern is expected from the architecture: guard scoring and response-control evaluation add deterministic overhead, and
retrieval-conditioned prompts increase prefill and decoding work relative to no-context
baselines. A useful comparison strategy is equal-quality frontier analysis, where each

28

Table 7: Claim-to-evidence synthesis for principal findings.
Claim

Direct evidence in this manuscript

Support status

Controlled contextual inference
improves core dialogue quality
over raw contextual inference
Controlled system outperforms
external no-context baselines on
most tested quality axes
Guarded retrieval substantially
improves adversarial robustness

Table 4, Fig. 3: positive ∆CR, ∆P C, ∆N , Supported
under
∆OQ with strictly positive 95% CIs
fixed-scenario protocol
Table 3: 10/12 significant-positive metrics per Supported for meabaseline and positive ∆OQ in both comparisons sured quality axes

Security results: ASR reduced from 1.0000 to Supported for tested
0.0000 on both poisoned and trust-spoofed stress attack families
sets
Architecture is faster than Table 6: TTFT and total latency higher; through- Not supported
lightweight baselines at current put slightly lower than baseline
operating point

system is evaluated at the minimum latency required to satisfy a fixed quality target.
This avoids misleading conclusions in which a faster model is favored only because it
operates at a lower quality point. Taken together, the ablations provide a coherent system
decomposition: response control is the dominant contributor to quality gains, guarded
retrieval is the dominant contributor to robustness, and serving efficiency is the principal
unresolved bottleneck.
To keep chapter-level interpretation auditable, Table 7 consolidates the primary
claims against their direct evidence and support status under the current protocol.

4.5

Threats to validity and interpretive boundaries

Internal validity is influenced by threshold selection in response control and guard scoring, even when pipeline automation reduces manual evaluation bias. This risk is mitigated through explicit artifact release, ablation reporting, Python-C++ parity checks, and
prompt-template controls that enforce consistent field ordering and key normalization between benchmark and runtime paths. Another internal threat is evaluator-mediated bias
in automatic quality judgments. Although the current protocol combines automatic and
human ratings, judge-style evaluation frameworks can still carry position and verbosity
biases [30, 29, 31]; consequently, interpretation emphasizes convergent trends across
independent metrics rather than a single score family.
External validity remains limited by label coverage and genre coverage. The core
retrieval label set is still relatively small, so retrieval-superiority conclusions are inten-

29

tionally constrained until wider-domain labels are integrated. Generalization to other
game genres is also uncertain, because narrative role-play settings differ from sandbox or
competitive multiplayer contexts where brevity and tempo can dominate response quality requirements. This limitation is consistent with the broader LLM-in-games literature,
which reports promising interaction gains while still facing transfer and deploymentfriction challenges across platforms and play styles [2, 3, 4].
Construct validity is constrained by the multi-dimensional nature of dialogue quality.
No single metric captures “good NPC dialogue,” so the study uses a bundle of context,
persona, naturalness, overall quality, retrieval, serving, and security metrics with human
preference checks. Even under this design, construct drift can occur when raters interpret
naturalness differently; the protocol addresses this by providing rubric definitions with
worked examples during rater onboarding. In addition, retrieval-robustness constructs
can be sensitive to attack design, and different adversarial families may produce different
failure profiles [46, 47].
Reproducibility validity is affected by runtime drift in model revisions, serving backends, and library stacks. To reduce ambiguity, the pipeline records run metadata and
executable manifests. A related risk is metric coupling, where improvements in one
axis suppress another; this is handled by reporting both gains and trade-offs instead of
collapsing results into a single opaque score. This reporting choice follows recent recommendations in evaluation practice that discourage one-number claims for complex
interactive systems [34, 29, 31].

4.6

Comparison with prior work and practical implications

The central outcome is not a generic statement that one model is best everywhere.
The stronger conclusion is architectural: integrating context extraction, guard-aware
retrieval, and response control yields reliable improvements in context and persona
quality while substantially improving adversarial robustness. Relative to prior work
that emphasizes either generative interaction quality [1] or retrieval-aware generation
quality [20, 48], the present system-level contribution is the explicit coupling of those
components with runtime admissibility control and adversarial evaluation in a single

30

in-engine protocol.
This distinction is important for scientific reporting. Many studies show promising
prompts but under-specify runtime controls, making replication and deployment uncertain. Here, the runtime and evaluation paths are intentionally coupled, and conclusions
are constrained by explicit evaluation criteria. The comparative pattern across experiments is consistent: response control contributes the largest quality movement, guarded
retrieval contributes the dominant security movement, and the remaining bottleneck is
systems efficiency. This decomposition clarifies why quality and robustness gains do not
automatically imply latency gains. Accordingly, the novelty statement in this manuscript
is scoped to the reviewed literature and measured protocol, and is not presented as a universal “first-in-field” claim.
From an engineering perspective, the current system is best suited for narrative experiences where role fidelity, state consistency, and safety are more critical than minimal
latency. If throughput is the primary objective, lighter serving configurations still hold
an advantage, including settings optimized around speculative decoding and memoryefficient serving stacks [27, 28]. The practical implication is to choose deployment points
on an explicit quality-latency frontier rather than on raw speed alone.
An additional practical implication is workflow design. Teams can adopt the architecture incrementally: first introduce state serialization and evaluation harnesses, then add
guarded retrieval, and finally add response control with parity tests. This staged integration reduces adoption risk for existing production pipelines while preserving traceability
of where specific gains originate.
The broader significance is interdisciplinary. The system sits at the intersection of
game AI, natural language generation, retrieval security, and human-centered evaluation. As a result, progress depends on coordinated advances in all four areas rather than
isolated gains in any single subfield. This interdisciplinary framing also motivates the
manuscript’s evaluation breadth: narrative quality, robustness, and serving behavior are
treated as jointly necessary for practical deployment.

31

Chapter 5: Conclusions, implications, and future directions
This chapter synthesizes the findings into bounded scientific conclusions and deployment
implications. It distinguishes supported claims from unresolved limitations and then
outlines the most consequential next steps for both research and practice.

5.1

Ethical and policy implications for NPC deployment

The architecture is designed for interactive entertainment, but its risk profile is not limited
to content quality. Role-grounded generation can amplify stereotypes or exclusionary
language if persona definitions or retrieval corpora are biased, and retrieval pipelines
can be exploited through adversarial artifacts that appear authoritative. These concerns
are consistent with broader analyses of social and safety risks in large language models
[40, 41]. In response, the study includes explicit adversarial evaluation, response-level
admissibility checks, and transparent reporting of both gains and failure trade-offs.
Data governance and user trust present a second ethical axis. Narrative-game interactions can contain sensitive player behavior signals, so context serialization and logging
must minimize unnecessary retention and avoid exposing private state attributes. Although this manuscript focuses on algorithmic performance rather than legal compliance
design, the reporting protocol is structured to support external audit by making metric
procedures, confidence intervals, and stress-test outcomes inspectable. This is particularly important where systems can be manipulated through prompt-level and retrievallevel attacks [46, 47].
Finally, responsible deployment requires clarity about what the system does not guarantee. The current evidence supports improvements in grounded quality and robustness under the evaluated benchmark, but does not establish universal safety or universal
generalization. For this reason, claims are bounded to measured conditions, and negative findings are retained. This policy follows the same principle underlying alignment
and constitutional approaches: safety mechanisms should be treated as operational constraints that require continuous measurement, not one-time guarantees [39].
From a management perspective, a staged deployment policy is recommended: first

32

deploy with strict guard and fallback thresholds in high-risk narrative branches, then
relax style constraints only after observing stable grounding and low ASR under live
telemetry. This sequencing aligns operational risk control with measured evidence and
prevents premature optimization for stylistic variability at the expense of consistency
and safety.

5.2

Principal findings and bounded claims

This paper presents a full system and evaluation framework for dynamic game-stateinformed NPC dialogue in narrative games. The proposed pipeline demonstrates consistent improvements in context relevance, persona consistency, and overall dialogue
quality, together with strong robustness to retrieval poisoning in controlled stress tests.
The study yields a conditional conclusion rather than a universal one: the architecture
is advantageous when grounded quality and robustness are primary objectives, and less
advantageous when latency is the dominant objective.

5.3

Study limitations

Three limitations are central. First, serving efficiency remains weaker than lightweight
baselines at the current quality-oriented operating point. Second, retrieval-superiority
conclusions are constrained by the present label coverage and query distribution. Third,
generalization beyond narrative-role-play conditions remains unverified for faster interaction genres with stricter response-time constraints. These limitations keep the conclusion deliberately conditional rather than universal.

5.4

Future research agenda

Future work should focus on quality-preserving acceleration, broader retrieval labels,
stronger cross-domain generalization tests, and larger-scale human studies with richer
demographic coverage. These directions are necessary to determine whether the observed gains generalize under broader workloads and stricter real-time constraints.

33

Artifact and reproducibility statement
All quantitative conclusions in this manuscript are grounded in versioned supplementary
artifact bundles, including run manifests, metric summaries, confidence-interval reports,
raw benchmark traces, and analysis scripts. The package is structured to support independent verification of every reported numerical result.

Appendix A: Reproducibility protocols and extended methods
This appendix section consolidates procedural details required for independent reproduction of the reported results. It expands implementation-level decisions, protocol settings,
and audit conventions that are summarized in the main chapters.

A.1

Scenario taxonomy

The 112-scenario set is generated to cover heterogeneity in archetype, conflict type, location type, and behavior state. Archetypes include guard, scholar, merchant, healer, outlaw, and ritual specialist roles. Conflict categories include denial, negotiation, urgency,
deception attempt, and memory conflict. Location categories include city, shrine, wilderness, naval, law hall, and market contexts. Behavior states include patrol, investigation,
combat-ready, idle social, quest handoff, and recovery modes.
The design goal is to reduce overfitting to one style of prompt and create meaningful
variance for context and persona checks. Each scenario includes expected context keys
and role cues to support metric computation and qualitative inspection.

A.2

Prompt and context serialization specification

Prompt layout is deterministic with bounded sections: persona block, context block,
retrieval evidence block, and user utterance. Context keys are normalized to reduce alias
ambiguity. We avoid free-form key generation during runtime; only predefined keys are
emitted by context extraction modules. This design simplifies parser logic and lowers
failure probability in downstream post-processing.

34

A.3

Response-control specification

The response controller evaluates candidate outputs through a sequence of structural and
semantic checks that include prohibited-pattern filtering, context-key alignment scoring,
persona-style consistency assessment, and minimal coherence and length checks before
fallback decisions are applied. The C++ implementation mirrors Python-side behavior
to prevent benchmark-vs-runtime divergence. For factual-stability diagnostics, we also
monitor sampled self-consistency signals as a secondary alert channel, following the
black-box consistency principle demonstrated in hallucination-detection work such as
SelfCheckGPT [33].

A.4

Adversarial retrieval protocol

Adversarial sets include poison documents and trust-spoofed variants that imitate metadata authority. Baseline is retrieval without guard penalty. Guarded condition applies
risk/trust penalties and directive checks before final ranking. Attack success is measured
by whether the system follows poisoned directives. This binary framing is intentionally
conservative.

A.5

Human evaluation protocol

The campaign uses three independent raters and shared overlap to estimate inter-rater
agreement. Metrics are normalized to [0,1] and include context relevance, persona consistency, naturalness, and overall quality. Pairwise kappa is reported per metric and
aggregated by mean.

A.6

Compute and runtime environment

Serving and evaluation are executed with local inference endpoints and recorded host
metadata. The pipeline captures model IDs, prompts, and configuration parameters (temperature, max tokens) to support reruns. CMake-based C++ builds and Python orchestration are executed through reproducible command manifests.

35

Appendix B: Extended interpretation and comparative notes
This appendix section provides interpretive extensions that would otherwise interrupt the
main argument flow. It retains comparative nuance, additional limitations context, and
design reflections while preserving claim discipline from the core chapters.

B.1

Comparative-scope limitations

This work compares against external baselines under identical prompts and datasets,
which is appropriate for engineering benchmarking but not equivalent to full protocol
replication of each cited paper. Conclusions in this manuscript are therefore constrained
to axes directly measured in the recorded benchmark artifacts.

B.2

Future work plan

The immediate roadmap includes decode-path acceleration with quality-parity checks,
expansion of the official retrieval label set, larger mixed human-subject and expert-rater
studies, explicit equal-quality serving-frontier reporting, and uncertainty-aware calibration of response-control thresholds.

B.3

Detailed reproducibility report

This section is intentionally detailed to serve two goals: first, to document full implementation logic for independent reproduction; second, to provide the depth typically
expected in long-format engineering papers where the contribution combines system design, evaluation protocol, and deployment constraints rather than a single model novelty.
The text below is organized as procedural documentation in IEEE narrative style.
Methodological reporting is aligned with reproducibility-first practice: every benchmark run is linked to a manifest containing model identity, decoding configuration, scenario slice, and hash-stamped artifact outputs. The intent is to make each reported number traceable from manuscript table to executable run state, consistent with recommendations from reproducibility initiatives in machine learning [35].

36

Scenario construction follows a templated expansion approach. A base scenario definition contains archetype, locale, conflict objective, state variables, and success conditions. The generator expands each base by varying one or more dimensions while
preserving semantic validity constraints. For example, if archetype is “temple scholar,”
conflict variants can include misinformation injection, urgency override, contradictory
memory challenge, and authority spoofing; however, item-trade conflict templates are
disabled unless the scenario includes an economic context key.
Data validation occurs in three stages. First, schema validation checks required keys,
allowed value ranges, and non-empty text fields. Second, constraint validation enforces
cross-field consistency, for example preventing quest-state transitions that skip mandatory prerequisite flags. Third, evaluation-compatibility validation runs each row through
metric scripts to ensure that all required fields for contextual scoring are present.
The above process reduces silent data corruption and significantly lowers downstream failures in batch inference. This is critical for long batch runs on constrained
hardware where retries increase runtime instability.
Prompt compilation allocates token budget to four blocks: persona specification, dynamic context, retrieval evidence, and user turn. Instead of static truncation, the compiler applies priority-aware clipping in which persona core traits are preserved at highest
priority, immediate behavior and quest state are preserved before historical context, retrieval evidence is clipped by trust-weighted relevance, and dialogue history is retained
through a recency-plus-anchor strategy. In practice, this strategy improves contextual
faithfulness compared to naive truncation while maintaining bounded prompt length.
Let ri be base retrieval relevance and gi be guard penalty:
si = ri − λgi ,

where gi aggregates injection cue score, trust-spoof likelihood, and metadata inconsistency checks. Candidate documents are ranked by si , not ri . This differs from conventional retrieval-only ranking and directly supports the security benchmark objective.

37

Given raw generation ŷ , response control computes:
F (ŷ) = wc ϕc + wp ϕp + wn ϕn − wv ϕv ,

where ϕc is context consistency, ϕp persona style, ϕn naturalness proxy, and ϕv violation
risk. If F (ŷ) < τ , fallback policy triggers grounded safe response generation. Thresholds
are tuned on development scenarios and then frozen for benchmark runs.
Large evaluations are executed in batch mode with run-state persistence. In each
batch, the runner loads the next scenario slice, executes all arms under fixed generation
settings, writes raw request and response logs immediately, updates the checkpoint manifest, and computes per-batch health metrics. If process interruption occurs, execution
resumes from the last completed batch index. This design is necessary because long
cloud notebook sessions can terminate unexpectedly.
Three safeguards are used: no synthetic NaN filling for missing arms, minimum arm
success-rate checks before summary emission, and evidence-completeness criteria that
block summary emission when required checks are absent. These controls are simple
but effective at preventing accidental overstatement from incomplete runs.

B.4

Supplementary comparative discussion

Compared with generative-agent systems that prioritize social simulation and reflective
memory loops [1], the present architecture is narrower in behavioral scope but stronger
in runtime instrumentation and inferential control. The intended contribution is therefore
not broad social realism, but reliable state-grounded dialogue under engine constraints
with auditable evaluation outputs.
Relative to serving-efficiency literature, speculative decoding and optimized serving
engines provide clear throughput advantages in many workloads [27, 28]. The current
system does not outperform such baselines on latency or throughput, and this negative result is retained explicitly to separate quality and robustness improvements from systemsefficiency outcomes.
Relative to retrieval-grounded generation literature, modern retrieval-plus-critique

38

and graph-augmented pipelines improve factual conditioning [20, 48, 49], but adversarial
evidence handling remains comparatively under-reported in game-specific pipelines. In
this study, the strongest comparative gain appears on the robustness axis, where guarded
retrieval reduces attack-follow behavior to zero under the evaluated stress protocol.
Relative to alignment and preference-learning work [17, 38, 39], the design choice in
this paper is to complement training-time alignment with runtime control. Response control is treated as a deterministic admissibility layer that can enforce context and persona
constraints turn-by-turn, even when upstream generation confidence is unstable.
Finally, relative to evaluation practice based only on overlap-style scoring, this
manuscript adopts a broader evidence model combining context and persona metrics, inferential significance testing, preference outcomes, and agreement statistics
[23, 30, 29, 31, 50].

This structure is intended to improve construct validity for

narrative-game dialogue where strict state adherence matters as much as fluency.

B.5

Failure taxonomy

Failure analysis uses five high-level classes: context omission, where the response ignores a critical state variable; persona drift, where response style diverges from the NPC
role profile; instruction hijack, where malicious or irrelevant retrieval cues redirect behavior; temporal inconsistency, where the response contradicts recent dialogue memory;
and over-constrained language, where control pressure yields rigid but less natural text.
Each class is tracked with examples during validation. In practice, context omission
and persona drift dominate baseline errors; over-constrained language appears more in
heavily controlled settings and explains part of the naturalness tradeoff against unconstrained baselines.
Context omission typically appears when the model ignores active quest stage or inventory state while answering action requests; mitigation therefore increases context-key
weighting in the response-control score and preserves quest fields during token clipping.
Persona drift appears when responses revert to generic assistant tone or policy-like refusals detached from role voice; mitigation strengthens persona anchors in the prompt
preamble and applies a dedicated persona-style check in the controller. Retrieval hijack

39

appears when poisoned directives in high-ranked evidence are followed; mitigation uses
guard penalties, authority-source verification, and directive-cue suppression before final
evidence selection. Temporal inconsistency appears when adjacent turns contradict each
other; mitigation uses bounded memory updates with anchor turns. Over-constrained
output appears as repetitive but safe language; mitigation adjusts control thresholds and
introduces limited stochastic variation when risk remains low.

B.6

Qualitative case analyses

To complement aggregate metrics, representative case analysis was performed across
security, grounding, persona, retrieval-noise, and latency-sensitive conditions. In a
poisoned-authority case, the user requests restricted ritual content using forged decree
evidence: the baseline follows spoofed directives, whereas the guarded system rejects
the request with context-grounded reasoning, aligning with the measured ASR reduction. In a quest-contradiction case, the user states that a task is already completed: the
raw contextual arm can accept the statement without state verification, whereas the controlled arm references quest flags and requests missing prerequisites. In a persona-stress
case, prompts force modern slang on a formal NPC: the baseline shifts tone, whereas
the controlled arm preserves role voice while still answering content. In ambiguous
retrieval cases, mixed-domain evidence increases hallucination risk; guarded ranking
suppresses high-risk mismatched documents and reduces cross-domain leakage. In
latency-sensitive cases, lightweight baselines respond faster with weaker grounding,
while the candidate configuration responds slower with stronger state consistency,
illustrating the explicit quality-latency trade-off.

Appendix C: Comprehensive tables and scenario catalog
This appendix section contains long-form tabular evidence that supports the main statistical claims but is too large for the core narrative. The tables are kept in a referenceoriented format for traceability and re-analysis.

40

C.1

Supplementary tables

Table 8: Core metrics from the latest full benchmark evaluation.
Arm

Context Relevance Persona Consistency

Naturalness

Overall Quality

BERTScore F1

proposed_contextual_controlled

0.2647

0.3568

0.9288

0.3951

0.0871

proposed_contextual

0.0516

0.1419

0.8131

0.2143

0.0594

candidate_no_context

0.0267

0.1379

0.8234

0.2019

0.0365

baseline_no_context (phi3:mini)

0.0398

0.1615

0.8977

0.2279

0.0393

baseline_no_context_phi3_latest

0.0351

0.1617

0.8982

0.2266

0.0441

Table 9: Serving comparison from the latest system benchmark evaluation.
Model

TTFT mean (ms)

Total time mean (ms)

Tokens/s mean

Error rate

elara-npc:latest

542.62

3601.54

18.45

0.00

phi3:mini

273.86

3138.41

18.86

0.00

Table 10: Retrieval and adversarial security summary from benchmark artifacts.

C.2

Condition

Hit@5

MRR

nDCG@5

BM25

1.0000

0.8500

0.8893

Keyword overlap 0.9000

0.8333

0.8500

Random

0.4000

0.1650

0.2204

Reranker method

0.9000

0.8000

0.8262

Security Metric

Baseline

Guarded

ASR (poisoned set)

1.0000

0.0000

ASR (trust-spoofed set)

1.0000

0.0000

Relative ASR reduction

—

1.0000

Full scenario index (112 scenarios)
Table 11: Scenario-level taxonomy index used in the primary evaluation.

ID

Archetype

Location

Conflict

Behavior State

Primary Stress Axis

S001

Guard

City

Urgency

Patrol

context grounding stress

S002

Scholar

Shrine

Deception

Investigate

evidence reliability stress

S003

Merchant

Wilderness

Memory conflict

Combat-ready

temporal consistency stress

41

ID

Archetype

Location

Conflict

Behavior State

Primary Stress Axis

S004

Healer

Harbor

Authority spoof

Idle social

trust-spoof robustness stress

S005

Outlaw

Hall

Negotiation

Quest handoff

persona-boundary stress

S006

Ritualist

Market

Resource request

Recovery

safety-compliance stress

S007

Guard

City

Urgency

Patrol

context grounding stress

S008

Scholar

Shrine

Deception

Investigate

evidence reliability stress

S009

Merchant

Wilderness

Memory conflict

Combat-ready

temporal consistency stress

S010

Healer

Harbor

Authority spoof

Idle social

trust-spoof robustness stress

S011

Outlaw

Hall

Negotiation

Quest handoff

persona-boundary stress

S012

Ritualist

Market

Resource request

Recovery

safety-compliance stress

S013

Guard

City

Urgency

Patrol

context grounding stress

S014

Scholar

Shrine

Deception

Investigate

evidence reliability stress

S015

Merchant

Wilderness

Memory conflict

Combat-ready

temporal consistency stress

S016

Healer

Harbor

Authority spoof

Idle social

trust-spoof robustness stress

S017

Outlaw

Hall

Negotiation

Quest handoff

persona-boundary stress

S018

Ritualist

Market

Resource request

Recovery

safety-compliance stress

S019

Guard

City

Urgency

Patrol

context grounding stress

S020

Scholar

Shrine

Deception

Investigate

evidence reliability stress

S021

Merchant

Wilderness

Memory conflict

Combat-ready

temporal consistency stress

S022

Healer

Harbor

Authority spoof

Idle social

trust-spoof robustness stress

S023

Outlaw

Hall

Negotiation

Quest handoff

persona-boundary stress

S024

Ritualist

Market

Resource request

Recovery

safety-compliance stress

S025

Guard

City

Urgency

Patrol

context grounding stress

S026

Scholar

Shrine

Deception

Investigate

evidence reliability stress

S027

Merchant

Wilderness

Memory conflict

Combat-ready

temporal consistency stress

S028

Healer

Harbor

Authority spoof

Idle social

trust-spoof robustness stress

S029

Outlaw

Hall

Negotiation

Quest handoff

persona-boundary stress

S030

Ritualist

Market

Resource request

Recovery

safety-compliance stress

42

ID

Archetype

Location

Conflict

Behavior State

Primary Stress Axis

S031

Guard

City

Urgency

Patrol

context grounding stress

S032

Scholar

Shrine

Deception

Investigate

evidence reliability stress

S033

Merchant

Wilderness

Memory conflict

Combat-ready

temporal consistency stress

S034

Healer

Harbor

Authority spoof

Idle social

trust-spoof robustness stress

S035

Outlaw

Hall

Negotiation

Quest handoff

persona-boundary stress

S036

Ritualist

Market

Resource request

Recovery

safety-compliance stress

S037

Guard

City

Urgency

Patrol

context grounding stress

S038

Scholar

Shrine

Deception

Investigate

evidence reliability stress

S039

Merchant

Wilderness

Memory conflict

Combat-ready

temporal consistency stress

S040

Healer

Harbor

Authority spoof

Idle social

trust-spoof robustness stress

S041

Outlaw

Hall

Negotiation

Quest handoff

persona-boundary stress

S042

Ritualist

Market

Resource request

Recovery

safety-compliance stress

S043

Guard

City

Urgency

Patrol

context grounding stress

S044

Scholar

Shrine

Deception

Investigate

evidence reliability stress

S045

Merchant

Wilderness

Memory conflict

Combat-ready

temporal consistency stress

S046

Healer

Harbor

Authority spoof

Idle social

trust-spoof robustness stress

S047

Outlaw

Hall

Negotiation

Quest handoff

persona-boundary stress

S048

Ritualist

Market

Resource request

Recovery

safety-compliance stress

S049

Guard

City

Urgency

Patrol

context grounding stress

S050

Scholar

Shrine

Deception

Investigate

evidence reliability stress

S051

Merchant

Wilderness

Memory conflict

Combat-ready

temporal consistency stress

S052

Healer

Harbor

Authority spoof

Idle social

trust-spoof robustness stress

S053

Outlaw

Hall

Negotiation

Quest handoff

persona-boundary stress

S054

Ritualist

Market

Resource request

Recovery

safety-compliance stress

S055

Guard

City

Urgency

Patrol

context grounding stress

S056

Scholar

Shrine

Deception

Investigate

evidence reliability stress

S057

Merchant

Wilderness

Memory conflict

Combat-ready

temporal consistency stress

S058

Healer

Harbor

Authority spoof

Idle social

trust-spoof robustness stress

43

ID

Archetype

Location

Conflict

Behavior State

Primary Stress Axis

S059

Outlaw

Hall

Negotiation

Quest handoff

persona-boundary stress

S060

Ritualist

Market

Resource request

Recovery

safety-compliance stress

S061

Guard

City

Urgency

Patrol

context grounding stress

S062

Scholar

Shrine

Deception

Investigate

evidence reliability stress

S063

Merchant

Wilderness

Memory conflict

Combat-ready

temporal consistency stress

S064

Healer

Harbor

Authority spoof

Idle social

trust-spoof robustness stress

S065

Outlaw

Hall

Negotiation

Quest handoff

persona-boundary stress

S066

Ritualist

Market

Resource request

Recovery

safety-compliance stress

S067

Guard

City

Urgency

Patrol

context grounding stress

S068

Scholar

Shrine

Deception

Investigate

evidence reliability stress

S069

Merchant

Wilderness

Memory conflict

Combat-ready

temporal consistency stress

S070

Healer

Harbor

Authority spoof

Idle social

trust-spoof robustness stress

S071

Outlaw

Hall

Negotiation

Quest handoff

persona-boundary stress

S072

Ritualist

Market

Resource request

Recovery

safety-compliance stress

S073

Guard

City

Urgency

Patrol

context grounding stress

S074

Scholar

Shrine

Deception

Investigate

evidence reliability stress

S075

Merchant

Wilderness

Memory conflict

Combat-ready

temporal consistency stress

S076

Healer

Harbor

Authority spoof

Idle social

trust-spoof robustness stress

S077

Outlaw

Hall

Negotiation

Quest handoff

persona-boundary stress

S078

Ritualist

Market

Resource request

Recovery

safety-compliance stress

S079

Guard

City

Urgency

Patrol

context grounding stress

S080

Scholar

Shrine

Deception

Investigate

evidence reliability stress

S081

Merchant

Wilderness

Memory conflict

Combat-ready

temporal consistency stress

S082

Healer

Harbor

Authority spoof

Idle social

trust-spoof robustness stress

S083

Outlaw

Hall

Negotiation

Quest handoff

persona-boundary stress

S084

Ritualist

Market

Resource request

Recovery

safety-compliance stress

S085

Guard

City

Urgency

Patrol

context grounding stress

44

ID

Archetype

Location

Conflict

Behavior State

Primary Stress Axis

S086

Scholar

Shrine

Deception

Investigate

evidence reliability stress

S087

Merchant

Wilderness

Memory conflict

Combat-ready

temporal consistency stress

S088

Healer

Harbor

Authority spoof

Idle social

trust-spoof robustness stress

S089

Outlaw

Hall

Negotiation

Quest handoff

persona-boundary stress

S090

Ritualist

Market

Resource request

Recovery

safety-compliance stress

S091

Guard

City

Urgency

Patrol

context grounding stress

S092

Scholar

Shrine

Deception

Investigate

evidence reliability stress

S093

Merchant

Wilderness

Memory conflict

Combat-ready

temporal consistency stress

S094

Healer

Harbor

Authority spoof

Idle social

trust-spoof robustness stress

S095

Outlaw

Hall

Negotiation

Quest handoff

persona-boundary stress

S096

Ritualist

Market

Resource request

Recovery

safety-compliance stress

S097

Guard

City

Urgency

Patrol

context grounding stress

S098

Scholar

Shrine

Deception

Investigate

evidence reliability stress

S099

Merchant

Wilderness

Memory conflict

Combat-ready

temporal consistency stress

S100

Healer

Harbor

Authority spoof

Idle social

trust-spoof robustness stress

S101

Outlaw

Hall

Negotiation

Quest handoff

persona-boundary stress

S102

Ritualist

Market

Resource request

Recovery

safety-compliance stress

S103

Guard

City

Urgency

Patrol

context grounding stress

S104

Scholar

Shrine

Deception

Investigate

evidence reliability stress

S105

Merchant

Wilderness

Memory conflict

Combat-ready

temporal consistency stress

S106

Healer

Harbor

Authority spoof

Idle social

trust-spoof robustness stress

S107

Outlaw

Hall

Negotiation

Quest handoff

persona-boundary stress

S108

Ritualist

Market

Resource request

Recovery

safety-compliance stress

S109

Guard

City

Urgency

Patrol

context grounding stress

S110

Scholar

Shrine

Deception

Investigate

evidence reliability stress

S111

Merchant

Wilderness

Memory conflict

Combat-ready

temporal consistency stress

S112

Healer

Harbor

Authority spoof

Idle social

trust-spoof robustness stress

45

C.3

Research-question traceability matrix
Table 12: Traceability from research questions to implementation and evidence artifacts.

Objective

Implementation Path

Metric/Check

Artifact Evidence

RQ1 controlled

contextual arms with and

paired deltas on CR, P C, N, OQ

paired significance report

contextual gain

without response control

RQ2

fixed

significant-positive metric count and

cross-model comparison report

external

prompt

protocol

against phi3 baselines

∆OQ

RQ3 adversar-

guarded hybrid retrieval un-

ASR, relative ASR reduction, Safe@1

adversarial benchmark report

ial robustness

der poisoning and spoofing

RQ4

quality-

serving

TTFT, total latency, tokens/s deltas

serving benchmark report

latency

trade-

Γ criterion and coverage checks

quality report and manifests

baseline comparison

benchmark

with

identical runtime conditions

off
Inferential

evidence-completeness gate

completeness

with CI reporting

Security

ro-

guarded hybrid retrieval

ASR reduction and Safe@1

adversarial benchmark report

Serving repro-

identical prompt protocol

prompt parity + CI deltas

serving benchmark report

multi-rater campaign

kappa + preference rates

human-evaluation summary report

guard penalties + response

safety pass/fail under stress + refusal

risk and ethics audit logs

admissibility checks + audit

behavior review

bustness
ducibility
Human evaluation
Ethical
control

risk

traces

Appendix D: Scenario-level and counterfactual stress diagnostics
This appendix section documents fine-grained diagnostic procedures for scenario-level
and counterfactual robustness analysis. It complements aggregate metrics by making
failure modes, stress behaviors, and uncertainty handling explicit.

D.1

Scenario-level analytical notes

This appendix documents the scenario-level analysis procedure used to convert raw
benchmark outputs into interpretable findings. Instead of duplicating near-identical
narrative text for every row, we define a consistent audit protocol and provide representative deep-dive analyses that cover all stress families present in the 112-scenario
set.

46

For each scenario i, an audit record stores scenario metadata (archetype, location,
conflict, and behavior state), arm-level outputs and metric values, retrieval evidence
traces with guard penalties, the response-control decision path, and final pass or fail
status for each quality axis.
A scenario-level composite score is used for descriptive analysis:
Si = ηcr z(CRi ) + ηpc z(P Ci ) + ηn z(Ni ) + ηo z(OQi ) − ηv z(Vi ),

(29)

where z(·) is z-score normalization over the scenario set and Vi is violation risk. This
score is not used to replace primary metrics; it is used to support error triage and case
selection.
Scenario pass status is defined as:
Pi = 1(CRi ≥ τcr ∧ P Ci ≥ τpc ∧ Vi ≤ τv ) .

(30)

Observed failures are assigned to one dominant class using a deterministic precedence
rule:
class(i) = arg max [ωk eik ] ,
k∈K

(31)

where eik ∈ {0, 1} indicates whether failure class k is triggered and ωk is a precedence
weight. The class set K includes context omission, persona drift, retrieval hijack, temporal contradiction, and over-control.
Table 13 summarizes representative scenarios selected to cover all archetypes and
stress patterns. These rows are illustrative; the full 112-row machine-readable audit table
is included in supplementary material.
Per-scenario interpretation follows a fixed sequence in which metric deltas are verified first, retrieved evidence and guard penalties are inspected second, response-control
decision features are inspected third, the dominant failure class is assigned fourth when
applicable, and the final outcome is recorded as either supporting or weakening the tested
hypothesis. This procedure prevents post hoc narrative selection and keeps qualitative
interpretation aligned with quantitative evidence.
To align scenario notes with the main ablation analysis, each component contrast

47

Table 13: Representative scenario-level analytical notes.
Scenario Stress Type
S001
S014
S021
S028
S039
S052
S073
S104

Dominant Baseline Fail- Controlled-System Behavior
ure

Residual Risk

Urgency

Drops quest-state con- Preserves role voice and state terse phrasing
straints
checks
Deception
Accepts
unsupported Requests corroborating context
lower lexical variety
statements
Memory con- Contradicts prior turn Anchors reply to latest state snap- conservative
reflict
memory
shot
fusals
Authority
Follows fake trusted di- Guard demotes spoofed evidence recall loss on noisy
spoof
rectives
input
Ambiguity
Hallucinates
cross- Restricts to in-world evidence
less exploratory diadomain details
logue
Persona pres- Drifts to assistant-like Maintains healer persona and stylistic reduction
sure
tone
bounds
Repeated co- Escalates unsafe compli- Switches to bounded safe mode short repeated-turn
ercion
ance
outputs
Evidence
Selects inconsistent top- Re-ranks toward state consistency metadata
depenconflict
ranked doc
dence

is accompanied by a paired bootstrap interval over the scenario set. For a component
contrast estimate δ̂m,c , the appendix records:
) [
( ⋆ )
( ⋆ )]
(
, q0.975 δ̂m,c
,
CI0.95 δ̂m,c = q0.025 δ̂m,c

(32)

⋆ denotes bootstrap resamples of paired scenario deltas. This ensures that qualwhere δ̂m,c

itative case narratives remain anchored to uncertainty-aware quantitative evidence.

D.2

Counterfactual stress analysis notes

Counterfactual stress testing is used to assess robustness under controlled perturbations
of user intent, memory consistency, and retrieval trust signals.
Given a base interaction tuple (x, s, p), a counterfactual variant is generated as:
(x′ , s′ , p′ ) = Ta (x, s, p; ϵ),

(33)

where Ta is an attack-family operator and ϵ is perturbation intensity. The current protocol
keeps (s′ , p′ ) = (s, p) and perturbs only user content and retrieval candidates so that stategrounding requirements remain unchanged.
Attack families include forced compliance requests, false memory insertion, retrieval
poisoning lures, authority spoofing, and repeated pressure escalation.

48

A counterfactual test instance passes only if all requirements hold:
Picf = 1(¬Hi ∧ Gi ∧ Ri ) ,

(34)

where Hi denotes successful hijack behavior, Gi denotes grounding retention, and Ri
denotes persona-role retention. Dataset-level pass rate is:
1 ∑ cf
PassRatecf =
Pi .
Ncf
Ncf

(35)

i=1

Because Picf ∈ {0, 1}, this estimator is a Bernoulli sample mean. Under independent
scenario sampling it is unbiased for the underlying counterfactual pass probability, with
standard error
(
)
SE PassRatecf =

√

PassRatecf (1 − PassRatecf )
Ncf

.

(36)

This is the statistical reason confidence intervals can be attached to counterfactual pass
summaries in the same way as other proportion-valued outcomes.
Algorithm 8 Counterfactual robustness evaluation
Require: base scenario set S, attack family set A
1: for each scenario s ∈ S do
2:

for each attack family a ∈ A do

3:

generate perturbation s′ ← Ta (s)

4:

run baseline and guarded systems on s′

5:

compute H, G, R, P cf and log evidence traces

6:

end for

7: end for
8: aggregate ASR, pass rate, and per-family failure composition
9: return stress-test summary with confidence intervals

Across stress families, the dominant difference between systems is not style quality but constraint adherence under pressure. Baseline systems frequently accept highconfidence but inconsistent instructions. Guarded systems reject these instructions, retain role voice, and preserve state alignment at the cost of lower lexical diversity in
high-risk cases. This trade-off is acceptable for narrative-game deployments where con-

49

sistency and safety are primary design objectives.
Attack families are balanced across coercion, spoofing, and memory-conflict perturbations so that ASR outcomes are not driven by a single adversarial template. This
design choice is consistent with current retrieval-security practice, which emphasizes
attack-family coverage rather than single-pattern stress reporting [46, 47].

Acknowledgment
The author thanks research advisors and contributors to open-source ecosystems (UE5,
transformers, PEFT, ONNX Runtime, llama.cpp, and benchmark tooling) that enabled
rapid iterative experimentation.

References
[1] J. S. Park et al., “Generative Agents: Interactive Simulacra of Human Behavior,”
in UIST, 2023.
[2] R. Gallotta et al., “Large Language Models and Games: A Survey and Roadmap,”
arXiv:2402.18659, 2024.
[3] P. Sweetser, “Large Language Models and Video Games: A Preliminary Scoping
Review,” arXiv:2403.02613, 2024.
[4] A. Rao et al., “Collaborative Quest Completion with LLM-Driven Non-Player
Characters in Minecraft,” arXiv:2407.03460, 2024.
[5] F. R. Christiansen, L. N. Hollensberg, N. B. Jensen, K. Julsgaard, K. N. Jespersen, and I. Nikolov, “Exploring Presence in Interactions with LLM-Driven
NPCs: A Comparative Study of Speech Recognition and Dialogue Options,” in
Proc. 30th ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology, 2024,
doi: 10.1145/3641825.3687716.
[6] L. C. Mai, N. T. M. Huyen, and N. T. T. Trang, “Proceedings of the 11th International Workshop on Vietnamese Language and Speech Processing,” Association
for Computational Linguistics, Hanoi, Vietnam, 2025.

50

[7] G. H. T. Ha, T. N. K. Bao, and T. V. Minh, “VLSP 2025 Shared Task: A Seq2Seq
Transformer Approach to Vietnamese Semantic Parsing,” in Proc. 11th International Workshop on Vietnamese Language and Speech Processing, pp. 259–266,
2025.
[8] Q. Nguyen, H. Pham, and D. Dao, “VinaLLaMA: LLaMA-based Vietnamese Foundation Model,” arXiv:2312.11011, 2023.
[9] J. Vo, “Vi-Mistral-X: Building a Vietnamese Language Model with Advanced Continual Pre-training,” arXiv:2403.15470, 2024.
[10] N. Q. Duc, L. H. Son, N. D. Nhan, N. D. N. Minh, L. T. Huong, and D. V. Sang,
“Towards Comprehensive Vietnamese Retrieval-Augmented Generation and Large
Language Models,” arXiv:2403.01616, 2024.
[11] C. Tran and H. L. Thanh, “LaVy: Vietnamese Multimodal Large Language Model,”
arXiv:2404.07922, 2024.
[12] G. Wang et al., “Voyager: An Open-Ended Embodied Agent with Large Language
Models,” arXiv:2305.16291, 2023.
[13] Google DeepMind, “Scaling Instructable Agents Across Many Simulated Worlds,”
arXiv:2404.10179, 2024.
[14] M. Wevelsiep, N. T. Walker, N. Wagner, and S. Ultes, “A Voice-Controlled Dialogue System for NPC Interaction using Large Language Models,” in Proc. 15th
International Workshop on Spoken Dialogue Systems Technology (IWSDS), Bilbao,
Spain, 2025, pp. 29–38.
[15] P. Liu et al., “Pre-train, Prompt, and Predict: A Systematic Survey of Prompting
Methods in Natural Language Processing,” arXiv:2107.13586, 2021.
[16] B. Peng et al., “Instruction Tuning with GPT-4,” arXiv:2304.03277, 2023.
[17] L. Ouyang et al., “Training Language Models to Follow Instructions with Human
Feedback,” arXiv:2203.02155, 2022.

51

[18] E. J. Hu et al., “LoRA: Low-Rank Adaptation of Large Language Models,”
arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.
[19] T. Dettmers et al., “QLoRA: Efficient Finetuning of Quantized LLMs,”
arXiv:2305.14314, 2023.
[20] A. Asai et al., “Self-RAG: Learning to Retrieve, Generate, and Critique Through
Self-Reflection,” in Proc. ICLR, 2024.
[21] J. Wei et al., “Chain-of-Thought Prompting Elicits Reasoning in Large Language
Models,” arXiv:2201.11903, 2022.
[22] S. Yao et al., “ReAct: Synergizing Reasoning and Acting in Language Models,” in
Proc. ICLR, 2023.
[23] T. Zhang et al., “BERTScore: Evaluating Text Generation with BERT,” in ICLR,
2020.
[24] Y.-T. Yeh, M. Eskenazi, and S. Mehri, “A Comprehensive Assessment of Dialog
Evaluation Metrics,” in Proc. First Workshop on Evaluations and Assessments of
Neural Conversation Systems, 2021, pp. 15–33, doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.eancs-1.3.
[25] S. Lin, J. Hilton, and O. Evans, “TruthfulQA: Measuring How Models Mimic Human Falsehoods,” arXiv:2109.07958, 2021.
[26] S. Min et al., “FactScore: Fine-grained Atomic Evaluation of Factual Precision in
Long Form Text Generation,” arXiv:2305.14251, 2023.
[27] Y. Leviathan et al., “Fast Inference from Transformers via Speculative Decoding,”
arXiv:2211.17192, 2022.
[28] W. Kwon et al., “Efficient Memory Management for Large Language Model Serving with PagedAttention,” in SOSP, 2023.
[29] J. Gu et al., “A Survey on LLM-as-a-Judge,” arXiv:2411.15594, 2024.
[30] L. Zheng et al., “Judging LLM-as-a-Judge with MT-Bench and Chatbot Arena,” in
NeurIPS Datasets and Benchmarks, 2023.

52

[31] Y. Dubois et al., “Length-Controlled AlpacaEval: A Simple Way to Debias Automatic Evaluators,” arXiv:2404.04475, 2024.
[32] Y. Liu, D. Iter, Y. Xu, S. Wang, R. Xu, and C. Zhu, “G-Eval: NLG Evaluation
using GPT-4 with Better Human Alignment,” in Proc. 2023 Conf. on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 2511–2522, 2023, doi:
10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.153.
[33] P. Manakul, A. Liusie, and M. Gales, “SelfCheckGPT: Zero-Resource Black-Box
Hallucination Detection for Generative Large Language Models,” in Proc. 2023
Conf. on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 9004–
9017, 2023, doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.557.
[34] P. Liang et al., “Holistic Evaluation of Language Models,” Trans. Mach. Learn.
Res., 2023.
[35] J. Pineau et al., “Improving Reproducibility in Machine Learning Research (A Report from the NeurIPS 2019 Reproducibility Program),” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol.
22, no. 164, pp. 1–20, 2021.
[36] X. Liu et al., “AgentBench: Evaluating LLMs as Agents,” arXiv:2308.03688,
2023.
[37] Y. Bai et al., “LongBench: A Bilingual, Multitask Benchmark for Long Context Understanding,” in Proc. 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2024, pp. 3119–3137, doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.acllong.172.
[38] R. Rafailov et al., “Direct Preference Optimization: Your Language Model Is Secretly a Reward Model,” in NeurIPS, 2023.
[39] Y. Bai et al.,

“Constitutional AI: Harmlessness from AI Feedback,”

arXiv:2212.08073, 2022.
[40] E. M. Bender, T. Gebru, A. McMillan-Major, and S. Shmitchell, “On the Dangers of
Stochastic Parrots: Can Language Models Be Too Big?,” in Proc. ACM Conference

53

on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAccT), 2021, pp. 610–623, doi:
10.1145/3442188.3445922.
[41] L. Weidinger et al., “Taxonomy of Risks Posed by Language Models,” in Proc.
ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAccT), 2022,
pp. 214–229, doi: 10.1145/3531146.3533088.
[42] P. Lewis et al., “Retrieval-Augmented Generation for Knowledge-Intensive NLP
Tasks,” in NeurIPS, 2020.
[43] G. Mialon et al., “Augmented Language Models: A Survey,” arXiv:2302.07842,
2023.
[44] Y. Gao et al., “Retrieval-Augmented Generation for Large Language Models: A
Survey,” arXiv:2312.10997, 2023.
[45] K. Greshake et al., “Not What You’ve Signed Up For: Compromising Real-World
LLM-Integrated Applications with Indirect Prompt Injection,” arXiv:2302.12173,
2023.
[46] W. Zou et al., “PoisonedRAG: Knowledge Corruption Attacks to RetrievalAugmented Generation of Large Language Models,” in Proc. 34th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 25), pp. 3827–3844, 2025.
[47] S. S. Chaturvedi, G. Bagwe, L. E. Zhang, and X. Yuan, “AIP: Subverting RetrievalAugmented Generation via Adversarial Instructional Prompt,” in Proc. 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp.
15861–15878, 2025, doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.emnlp-main.801.
[48] D. Edge et al., “From Local to Global: A Graph RAG Approach to Query-Focused
Summarization,” arXiv:2404.16130, 2024.
[49] P. Zhao et al., “Retrieval-Augmented Generation for AI-Generated Content: A Survey,” arXiv:2402.19473, 2024.

54

[50] J. Cohen, “A Coefficient of Agreement for Nominal Scales,” Educ. Psychol. Meas.,
1960.

